In this video we'll go over C++ is increment and decrement operators.
I'm in the Section 8 workspace in the increment decrement operators project.
This is a pretty simple looking operator but there's a lot to it and it can be extremely confusing if
you ever use it.
Let's talk about it.
Basically it's the plus plus minus minus operator.
You've got two plus side by side or two minuses side by side.
All that means is increment something by one or decrement something by one.
In this example I'm only going to be using the increment operator but everything will apply to the detriment.
Operator OK so all it does is increment or decrement its operand by 1.
So if you use it with an integer it increases the integer by want or decreases the integer by 1 depending
on which one you're using.
If you're using it with the floating point numbers same thing it will increase it by one or decrease
it by one and we can also use it with pointers to move pointers along we haven't talked about pointers
yet but we'll use this operator when we talk about pointers in a future section.
There are two variants to this operator.
There's a prefix notation and a postfix notation.
All that means is that the operator is either before its operand or after its operand.
You can see here on line number nine that the operand is numb and the operator is to the left of it.
So that's prefix notation to postfix notation is when it appears to the right of the operand.
OK I'll say this a few times don't over use this operator and never use it twice for the same variable
in the same statement because the behavior is undefined You really don't know what you're going to get
good.
So now let's talk about the operator.
Let me scroll down just a little bit and I've got some examples here and I'll walk through these examples
really really carefully and slowly so you can understand what's going on.
For all of the examples I'll be using these two variables right here.
I'll be using a variable called counter in a variable called result.
They're both integers.
Counter will be initialized to 10 and result to zero.
OK so real straightforward counter will be 10 result will be zero Moken to manipulate those variables
and we'll see how this operator really works.
So let's start right here.
Uncomment example one I walk through this really slowly you can see what's happening I'm outputting
counter.
OK will counter is 10.
So this you expect it to display A10 And that's exactly what happens in this case I'm saying Kountry
equals counter plus 1 right.
So what's counter 10.
I'm adding 1 to it and then I'm putting it right back into counter some changing this 2011 and this
output statement would display an 11.
In this case I'm using counter plus plus that's the increment operator that's going to increment the
variable counter by one.
When you use it all alone like that if you've got an operand followed by a plus plus or a plus plus
before the operand it means exactly the same thing.
All it means is increment the operand by one.
OK.
It'll get a little more confusing in the next few examples but let's just get this one under our belt
so we can understand what's going on.
So what's happening here is we're incrementing that l value counter by 1.
So we're going to counter incrementing it by 1.
Now it's 12.
And we're going to display counter here which is 12 the pre-increment works exactly the same as the
post-increment.
When that thing is all alone on the line just like I said over here.
So in this case exactly the same thing will happen when you take the 12 and add 1 to it make it a 13
counter and I'll be 13 and output 13.
All right.
So in this context where do you want to increment something you could say counter equals counter plus
one or you could just say counter plus plus or you could say plus plus counter.
All three of them mean the same thing.
Later on we'll talk about a different operator.
The plus equals operator that does does the same thing as well.
So there's a bunch of different ways that you can achieve the same result.
I'm going to clear this.
And remember we've got 10 11 12 and 13 as the output.
So I'll clean or clear this and let's run this example and you can see that counter is 10 11 12 and
13 just like what we expected.
All right so now let's look at a little bit more complicated example and I'm going to comment this out
and I'll pass a comment.
It's not the lead.
And I will uncomment out example to
OK.
So let's go through this one again really carefully what we've got here is again I've reset counter
to 10 end result to zero.
All of these examples are going to start in the same place counter will be 10 result will be zero.
So here I mean to say I want to output counter will counter is 10 right.
So we expect this to display a 10.
Now we're doing a pre-increment of counter and we're storing the result into that variable called result.
So what's happening here is there's really a few things going on here.
If you just see that plus plus and just taken out for a second and the result is something like this
result equals counter.
That's the real assignment statement that's going on here.
The plus plus in front of countermands it's prefix notation which means that counter will be incremented
before it's used.
So in this case before happens here its use is right here but before it's used We're going to say counter
equals.
I'll just say counter plus one just to be really explicit.
So this statement right here that's the effect of that statement.
I want to increment counter before I use it.
And then I want to use it by assigning it to result.
All right so let's do those two steps and see what happens.
Counter equals counterplot one we just made Kountry 11 and then we're going to assign counter to results
we'll count these 11.
So result when I'll be 11 now I want to display counter counts will be 11 and result will be 11.
So this is what I expect is the output 10 11 and 11.
Remember this is the use and this is the effect of that pre-increment.
All right so let me clear this and run it again.
We're expecting 10:11 in 11
build and run and there it is 10 11 and 11 exactly what we expected.
All right I'll comment out that piece and we'll do another example this time with a post-increment.
And remember I'm using the increment but the decrement works exactly the same way.
It just decreases the value by 1.
All right.
Uncomment this example and let's walk through this one again one more time I'm initialising count or
I'm assigning tend to counter and 0 2 result.
And I'm saying.
Print out the counter while it's 10 we expect the 10 here.
That's an easy one.
But now we're doing a post-increment.
Notice it's on the right side or it's following counter its operand.
So this becomes result equals counter
and the post-increment simply means that we're going to increment counter after we use it.
Well we're using it here.
So let's increment it.
After this time.
So again I'll be really explicit here and I'll say counter equals counter plus one.
So that's the effect of that statement.
So let's execute this statement result is counter.
Counters 10.
So let's put ten in here.
Now we increment countered by 1.
So that becomes 11 and now we display counter which is 11 and result which is 10.
So in this case this is the output we expect 10 11 and then 10.
All right let's give that a shot.
And there we go 10 11 and 10 let's do a few more examples so I want to be sure that you really understand
this.
That's uncomment example for here.
An example for just uses the expression that's a little bit more complicated not much but a little bit
so you can see how this works.
In this case one more time I've set those to 10 and 0 and I'm displaying counter counters 10.
Again really easy.
Now we've got this statement going on right here.
Result equals plus plus counterplot 10.
The best way to really look at these things is just get rid of that guy right now.
So just say result equals counter plus 10.
That's the statement.
And now since the plus plus is a pre-increment it's on the left side of counter that means that we increment
counter before we use it.
We're using it here.
So that means that we use we do this before we execute that statement.
So again counter equals counter plus 1.
All right.
So let's do this.
Counter's counterplot one this becomes 11 then we say result is counter plus 10 will counter is 11.
So 11 plus 10 is going to give us a 21 which we're going to store in result.
So result here we'll get a 21 got it perfect now we're displaying counter.
It's 11 result is 21.
That's what we expect to display 10 11 and 21.
This may seem a little contrived and puzzle like and it may be but this kind of code is seen out there
you really need to understand the effect of the pre-increment in the post-increment with these operators.
So 10 11 and 21 is what we expect.
Let's run this
and 10 11 and 21 is what we get.
OK.
So let's come at this one out and you'll notice what this one the next one exemple five is exactly like
example for except we've got a post-increment right here right there you can see it's the same idea
except it's the plus plus is after the operand.
OK.
So again 10.0 we're starting out we're saying just play the counter what the counter is 10.
That's pretty easy.
Here's the statement let's just rewrite it without the increment.
So we're going to say result equals again.
Counter plus 10.
I'm trying to write nice and big so hopefully everybody can see this OK.
And we're doing the increment of counter after we use it.
That means after we use it we're using it here.
So this becomes counter is counter plus one.
All right so let's execute these two statements we'll put some semi-colons there just to be complete.
So result is counter plus 10 will what's counter-counter is 10.
So that becomes a 20 and we're storing 20 and 2 result and then we're incrementing counter by 1.
So counter becomes 11 OK the output says what's counter 11 words result 20.
So in this case 10 11 and 20 is what we expect 10 11 and 20.
Let's run this
and 10 11 and 20 is exactly what we get
OK.
So hopefully that clears it up.
And one of the examples if you know if you remember up at the top I mentioned just scroll up a little
bit it says here.
Never use it twice for the same variable in the same statement.
That could be something like.
Suppose you do see out and you've got something like I don't know let's just say we have an integer.
I will say I plus plus and then go do something like plus plus I and you have something like that you
really have no clue what's going to happen because you're incrementing two times in the same statement
and that's not a good idea.
Sometimes you'll see people do silly things like plus plus plus plus plus or something like that just
because you can see puzzles.
But that's that's a bad thing to do because you're you're using it twice on the same variable in the
same statement.
And that's that behavior is totally undefined so your guess is as good as mine as to what the result
is going to be.
OK so hopefully this gives you a little bit of a little bit of insight into this.
Operator It's a simple operator when you just say I plus Pusser count plus plus or plus plus count.
Really really simple.
But when you start combining it with other operands and other expressions and operators it can get pretty
complicated and that's why I say don't overuse this operator.
It's really a great operator to use when we'd loop and we'll do that later on when we used pointers.
But keep your eye on don't over use it.